this is now the dawn of October 2018
early October um I'm talking about an
issue that for me has been on my mind
for quite some time
I was partly delayed in making this
video just due to illness partly because
we have so much on our plate but I had
the audio recording of a conversation
between Isaac ask yourself and Sam
Harris shared with me before it turned
up on YouTube before it turned up on the
Internet at large so I didn't way back
then two weeks ago or something I was
already planning to make this video and
now lo and behold all this time has gone
past with me having to remove snot from
my head by means of a handkerchief and
I'm finally back at my desk recording
videos I said I think I ran a high
school I think I was I think it was at
least ten months without any illness
whatsoever I haven't been sick since I
left China but I'm neither immune nor
immutable to worldly disease so sooner
or later these things catch up with you
in my case I'm glad to say it was later
rather than sooner okay
so part of the argument between sam
harris and isaac revolved around this
concept of life itself being a net
positive now in an earlier video that I
think is fully one hour long my
girlfriend and I were both on the
microphone simultaneously and we both
kind of rift and reflected on the
absurdity of this a little bit I'm not
gonna repeat what I said there um and
I'm also not gonna repeat Isaac's
argument on this which is actually quite
similar to what we recorded those things
separately without knowing about what
each other said but he made some similar
comments of what the fundamental
absurdity of applying this notion of a
net positive to animals we would never
think in that way about about human
beings but I want to actually take this
video in a very different direction I
think that the hypothetical question of
how we would write legislation on an
issue often disciplines the discussion
and debate in a very useful way even
when or especially when the legislation
you're talking
writing is impossible and impractical so
to give you an example um I used to be
involved in Buddhism Buddhism as a
religion but a scholarship
I studied the languages in history and
politics
I wrote essays about that stuff but I
also did meet and speak with Buddhist
monks face to face and it was quite
peculiar the contrast between the
ethical issues Buddhist monks wanted to
debate amongst themselves Buddhist monks
and Buddhist scholars say the kind of
people who are supposed to be kind of in
the know kind of in the separate elite
world um in contrast to what Buddhist
laypeople were interested in the
parishioners if you like so you know the
parishioners would have one set of kind
of ethical questions and demands and
then when you were in the more rarefied
and secluded setting you got to see by
contrast what it was but a smoked eye
but so some of this stuff has come up on
the video before you actually got a lot
of questions about living with wild
animals in the jungle
many of the Buddhist monks prided
themselves on going out and living in a
living in a cave in the middle of the
jungle and then when you live in the
cave guess what
there were pythons and bears so you know
some of that was quite a dread for me
unexpected like you know you sit down
have this conversation with people I'm
doing all this research on history and
languages and politics I don't think I'm
gonna hear a monologue about the
difficulty of handling you know pythons
and bears coming into your cave in the
middle of the jungle you just got some
interesting anecdotes and perspective on
life but me very often there'd be
detailed in-depth discussions about the
ethically correct thing to do when a
parishioner asked your advice about
medical treatment for an elderly
relative so you know you'd have multiple
Buddhist monks in the room with some
Buddhist scholars and they want to be
talking about people being taken off
life support people being given this
medication or that medication and so on
and believe it or not this concern does
go back you know approximately 2500
years in the ancient Pal we can and we
do have discussions about the ethics and
morality and
- what sort of advice but a smoke
shouldn't shouldn't give and also just
from a real-world pragmatic point of
view these monks were having to save
themselves at least in this private
situation they don't feel they have any
of the medical expertise necessary to
give that kind of advice but remember
one discussion that came up repeatedly
at that time the internet was a little
bit more of a new thing than it is today
was the relationship between Buddhist
ethics and piracy here meaning software
piracy and intellectual property rights
and it was quite peculiar from my
perspective that the Buddhist monks
occupied a variety of extreme
contrasting positions on this some took
the view that intellectual property
doesn't exist that it is not theft to
make a copy of a book that doesn't steal
the original book so whether that's like
a photocopy or via the internet that
you're producing multiple copies of the
same thing that nothing is being stolen
and nothing's being subtracted etc and
then on the other side of the bait you
could get monks who would put their
finger down on the actual ancient writ
of Scripture and say no no in the
original Pali
in the ancient language it doesn't say
anything about stealing its forbidding
you to take what is not given you know
and looking at questions of intellectual
property and what having this line now
this whole conversation is suddenly
disciplined and brought into focus and
made productive and we avoid wasting a
lot of time when we just refer it to a
question of legislation now in some
cases that can be done in sincerely you
can kind of shut down a productive and
worthwhile conversation but I think in
many cases whether this is done
cynically or sincerely it's really
useful to refer the principle being
proposed hypothetical legislation to
highlight the extent to which this
discourse has gotten detached from
reality so I can you have a bunch of
Buddhist monks who are capable of
debating this topic ad infinitum oh the
relative merits of property law and the
interpretation of ancient scripture in
the Internet
era as applied to you know mostly the
books that were interested in pirating
were you know ancient Buddhist
scriptures kind of bizarre situation
Buddhist monks downloading copies of you
know 2,000 year old texts that they
can't get ahold of you know on paper at
a library what have you interesting
situation um say look you know do you
really think there's a rule here that
could be applied to other people
prescriptively do you really think this
could possibly be legislated and then
all of a sudden what may seem like
erudite points being scored in this
debate suddenly seem quite ridiculous so
in this same way for some years now Sam
Harris
I know it's Coulomb practical
philosopher sam Harris political
philosopher sam Harris has been toting
this notion of a net positive value
being ascribed to the life of an animal
and his point is that he thinks it would
be permissible to eat the flesh of an
animal if their life was in contrast to
what he perceives as a net negative in
the world's current system of factory
farming if this animals life was instead
a net positive
now again Sam Harris he is a devout
Buddhist despite his claims to being an
atheist no other I've had other videos
discussing that you can read his work in
print in which he explains to you just
what a developed bonused he is and how
he's going to bend over backwards to
make it seem as if different doctrines
and magical notions and buddhism are
based in science or could be validated
by science so there's actually a little
bit of overlap between these these two
examples I've chosen a pig could we
possibly say that the life of a pig
is a net positive if the pig's life
entire life is less than 12 months long
can we possibly say that the life of a
pig is a net positive
if it's castrated and I just know most
slaughterhouses most factory farms then
we're not even doing surgical castration
you can look into the gruesome and
painful method of castration that's used
to be more economically efficient if a
pig is born castrated it has its its
largest teeth torn out of its skull with
no anesthetic so that it can't grow
these tusks and then is killed after
just a few months it does vary from farm
to farm there are farms that kill pigs
after only four months there are pigs
that kill monks that kill the pigs after
six months you'll you can look it up the
different methods and cycles but as
you'd imagine part of the efficiency of
factory farming is trying to get the the
cycle of raising these animals to be as
few months as possible because every
month for the pigs alive it's eating
rather than being packaged as as meat
now with just these few principles here
yeah because I mean to me of course this
is a ridiculous notion the idea of the
net positive life of an animal on a farm
but by pressing forward saying could we
actually produce a set of criteria that
could be legislated some in same kind of
question with intellectual property laws
if you're saying there's some kind of
general principle here about not copying
a book digitally in this case staring
with a book that's in the public domain
2,000 year old book or something um what
is that principle how would it be
legislated how would it be specified in
law how would that be law be enforced
and just starting to think that through
all of a sudden a lot of a lot of
frankly pointless counterproductive
questions drop out of the debate in the
same way it very rapidly becomes clear
that the for-profit farming of hogs the
profit that the profitable farming of
pigs would completely cease to exist
with just these few legal stipulations
so if the pig had to live for what's it
gonna be
is it one year is it two years is it
three years how short can a pig's life
be in captivity and still be
calculated as a net positive now I mean
there were other questions that are very
obvious what about artificial
insemination versus the pig actually
reproducing through selecting its mate
through having some natural behaviors
you know etc you can come up with a
checklist I mean it's a completely
surreal exercise but my point is exactly
to highlight how surreal that inevitably
must be so I say the question of
legislation for me uh I also want to say
this it was quite striking to me that in
a recent video um Isaac came out
swinging he started a video and he said
quite passionately on camera that it was
only a matter of time before the
slaughter of animals for Mead the buying
and selling of cow meat etc would be
illegal he felt it was inevitable that
it was just a matter of time before this
type of morality was legislated and you
know I mean he had a very sincere
passionate tone in his voice and it was
I was just surprised to hear that and I
don't I don't actually see that the
future of veganism as being in terms of
legislation that straightforward to that
black and white the comparison I often
like to make is to the abolition of
cigarettes cigarette smoking nicotine
where almost nobody is talking about
making cigarettes illegal even though
almost everyone agrees that we should I
mean in a perfect world in a perfect
world would cigarettes be legal or
illegal in a perfect world would anyone
smoke tobacco that's quite easy to to
answer and now to turn to our imperfect
world and say well how do you want to
actually bring about the end of
cigarette smoking what kind of
legislation and what kind of enforcement
again I think that does discipline the
the conversation and you know it seems
that even the majority of people who
devote devote their lives to politics
you know not just the majority in
general but even the majority of people
who are really passionate about public
health policy almost nobody is
considering the option of making
cigarettes
into an illicit drug like cocaine or
heroin where you know the full force of
the law is used to try to prevent people
from from using these things entirely so
in the same way I generally emphasize
that the transition we're gonna make
with meat and dairy is probably going to
be primarily one of public education and
a cultural transformation but I do I do
definitely see there being legal changes
along the way that can that can
facilitate that transition we have many
examples even staying within the example
of cigarette smoking the labels on
cigarettes telling you that this is not
healthy that nobody under the age of 18
should consume it that this causes
cancer etc etc public education
campaigns there there's a there's a
consensus and there's a very overt
political conspiracy to try to nudge the
public step-by-step into being a public
of universal non-smokers but there's
also a broad consensus that this should
be done with as little outright coercion
as possible
although we all know what kind of
coercion actually exists for example
there are many jobs where you cannot
smoke on the job you have to go outside
to smoke or you have to quit smoking or
to keep your job etc so there are there
are some coercive elements to it to be
sure but anyway that really brought this
into a kind of sharp focus in my mind
hearing Isaac make that comment because
when I look at an example like Isaac's
debate with Sam Harris I think the
significance of raising legislation is
first and foremost to disambiguate the
ethical arguments were engaged in and
say no no no no this isn't just this
isn't just about the parlor room this
isn't just about standing in front of a
chalkboard or this isn't just about
standing in the drawing room of a
Buddhist monastery a somewhat peculiar
setting I'm familiar with you know and
talking about these ideas as somehow
having validity in and of themselves
let's talk about real-world consequences
and let's let you know let's let at
least the thought of those real-world
consequences guide and discipline the
decisions were making
you know the fact is I feel this isn't a
problem we can solve simply by you know
vegans taking over the government and
making meat illegal and in talking that
through we're talking through what's
possible and impossible terms of
legislation I think it leads to a more
disciplined and refined and focused
discussion of what's possible and what
we ought to do right now in that
framework and in exactly the same way
it's not really that I'm all that
interested in it's not that I'm all that
interested in in treating as valid sam
Harris's notion of the net positive life
of the the animal on the farm but in a
sense one way to direct the conversation
back to what it is we do want to do the
positive difference we can make which
most obviously includes personally
living by a vegan diet adopting a vegan
discipline is exactly to say well okay
if you sincerely believe this if you
really believe in this criterion of
drawing a line between a net positive
and a net negative life which you know
ultimately must be a completely
subjective and cultural claim just like
you know we draw a line for when is the
age of consent ones in some countries at
16 incomes immigrants is 18 at what age
can somebody drive a car and what age
can somebody own a rifle some of these
lines we all know they're arbitrary and
yet if we're going to discuss them
seriously there's a pretty limited range
of options for where this line is going
to run if you really believe that this
is a line that is there to be drawn at
what age can you say can you possibly
say this pig has lived a good life this
pig in its steel cage underneath a shed
without seeing the sky this pig having
never reproduced having never been a
part of a you know a normal social
structure for its species having never
been a part of a pack having never
explored a forest having never lived as
a wild animal having never exhibited any
of its natural behaviors or traits as a
feral pig would as a wild pig would the
Pig living in confinement eating out of
a trough never foraging never exploring
this pig after how many months after how
many years could its existence
possibly be calculated as a net positive
to justify your decision to kill it
drink its blood eat its flesh to to to
nourish yourself I mean it is an
absolutely surreal proposition but I
think someone's supporting that position
I don't know how many people Sam Harris
represents with this philosophy of his I
think they're only really forced to
think through how surreal it would be
when we invite them to to disambiguate
and clarify their position what exactly
would you legislate net positive may
sound viable in the abstract let's bring
it down let's make it concrete in
particular let's talk about what the law
would be hypothetically that you didn't
force for these farmers and then right
away I think that's going to discipline
the debate and direct our conversation
towards the difference that we can make
and as you guys have heard me say again
and again here that's ultimately why
veganism is so important to me because
as powerless and isolated as we may be
as lacking in leadership lobbyists and
organizations as we may be veganism is
the difference we can make here right
now